# SatelliteSnowAccumAnalysis
DS4520 Project for Analyzing Snow Accumulation in Satellite Imagery!

The goal of this project is to identify and refine high quality regions of snow within overhead satellite imagery, for the purpose of snow accumulation tracking and weather prediction.
Data is sourced from the Sentinel Satellite Constellation: a fleet of imaging satellites that periodically image various locations on earth, and are capable of using onboard multispectral cameras to label landforms and features.
The focus of this project was overhead imagery from select North American Cities with snow cover during the winter: Boston, Buffalo, Chicago, New York.
Rather than using two wholly separate modeling techniques, this project combines neural network techniques and bayesian methods: with the neural network having the responsibility of a feature extractor, and the bayesian model serving to enhance and smooth the results. 

The neural network method takes the form of a CNN, with a UNet shape. The general idea of UNets is that they consist of a contracting path, which downsamples and reduces the size of the image using convolution layers and pooling. After a bottleneck point, the model expands the image using convolution layers, back to the size of the initial input image. This results in a per-pixel mask, which identifies whether each pixel in an image contains snow or not.
CNNs using a UNet architecture are demonstrated to be highly effective at segmentation tasks. 

The second half consist of a Bayesian Spatial Segmentation stage. It treats
each pixel probability (derived from logits) as a noisy observation of an un-
derlying latent snow state. The observed values are treated as conditionally
independent and assumed to follow a Bernoulli likelihood. Spatial structure
is then incorporated through a Hidden Markov Random Field prior, which
encourages neighboring pixels to share the same label. The posterior distri-
bution is then approximated with Gibbs sampling, which updates each pixel
based on its observed state and the state of its neighboring pixels.

## Initial Project Structure
The core training and inference code currently lives in:
- ImageDataset.py
- cnn_segmentation.py
- cnn_training.py

A docker container is provided to abstract out environment setup.
To launch any file in docker, you can run:

`docker compose run --rm app python [file_path]`

Alternatively, the requirements file can be used for a local installation.

For the Vercel demo and local inference:

`pip install -r requirements.txt`

For training and dataset work:

`pip install -r requirements-training.txt`

## Fetching Data
Data fetching occurs from the Sentinel Satellite Data Catalog. Metadata such as pre-existing weather data, image city/location, date ranges, and image sizing and chunking settings are used to target images that are most likely to have snowfall, and retrieve them for training and testing.

The API provided by Sentinel is very complex. The fetching script uses a reasonable preset, based on the Sentinel API documentation

`python -m SatelliteSnowAccumAnalysis.Fetch.sentinel_data_fetch`

This preset focuses on U.S cities snowfall, during winter date ranges where snowfall is most likely to occur. The max cloud setting serves to prevent the image from being unhelpfully obfuscated by cloud cover. The ratios ensure that the images we select actually contain snowfall: with images with higher amounts of snowfall being collected more often.

This ensures we still collect images without snowfall (as this is a useful edge-case for training, as otherwise we may not be able to properly handle sparse cases), but ensures we aren't saturated with these images alone. 

## Training CNN
The CNN uses a UNet style architecture, that has been slimmed down in size to be feasible to test and train.
Research shows that UNets are ideal for pixel classification / masking tasks.

To run the CNN, run the following from the root of the repo:
`python -m SatelliteSnowAccumAnalysis.Training.cnn_training`

It will train the model, run validation, export performance metrics over epochs, and save the model to disk.

## Export CNN Results
In this project, the Bayesian method serves to enhance the mask generated by the CNN, producing smoother and more reliable snow regions and clusters than the CNN could alone.
Therefore once the CNN has been ran, we must export its results to a format which the R code for the Bayesian model can operate on.

To perform this export with a trained CNN model:
`python -m SatelliteSnowAccumAnalysis.Training.cnn_export`

## Bayesian Spatial Segmentation - Hidden Markov Random Field
The Bayesian Spatial Segmentation approach leverages a Hidden Markov Random Field. This model is implemented from scratch, in R, in the following file: `SatelliteSnowAccumAnalysis/BSS_HMRF.R`

This program can be executed and modified using R Studio. It is important to export the CNN results, and point the implementation of this model towards this data so that it can load it in, and operate on it. 
